Live
LaAavv..

2022 LiveLaw (SC) 436

IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
INDIRA BANERJEE; A.S. BOPANNA, JJ.
Writ Petition (Civil) No. 1034/2021; 18-04-2022
VIVEK KRISHNA Versus UNION OF INDIA & ORS.

Summary: Writ petition seeking to impose restrictions to prevent Civil Servants
from contesting elections immediately after retirement or resignation from
service, by imposing a "Cooling off Period” - Dismissed - It is not for this Court
to decide whether or not there should be any rules/guidelines for a bureaucrat
to contest elections - Whether there should be any "Cooling off Period” for civil
servants for them to contest elections or not is best left to the concerned
Legislature - The allegations of bureaucrats deviating from strict norms of
political neutrality with a view to obtaining party tickets to contest elections, is
vague, devoid of particulars and unsupported by any materials which could
justify intervention of this Court.

Constitution of India, 1950; Article 32, 226 and 14 - Policy matters - Policy
matters are never interfered with, unless patently arbitrary, unreasonable or
violative of Article 14 of the Constitution.

Constitution of India, 1950; Article 32, 226 - Writ of Mandamus - Mandamus will
not be issued to command Legislature to enact a law, which it is competent to
enact - It cannot even issue a Mandamus to the Government for enforcement of
a Cabinet decision - When an administrative order confers rights or creates
estoppel against the Government, that Mandamus can be issued to enforce the
circular. Similarly a Mandamus may be issued to cancel an administrative order,
which violates the rules of fairness.

All India Services (Conduct) Rules, 1968 - Civil servants should maintain the
highest ethical standards of integrity and honesty; political neutrality; fairness
and impartiality in the discharge of duties, courtesy, accountability and
transparency - Integrity, impartiality, neutrality, transparency and honesty are
non-negotiable. Ethical standards necessarily have to be enforced and
stringent action taken against the concerned officer whenever there is any
breach of ethical standards as laid down in the All India Services (Conduct)
Rules, 1968.

For Petitioner(s) Petitioner-in-person
ORDER

The application for permission to argue and appear in-person being IA No.
117315/2021 is allowed.

Heard the Petitioner appearing in-person.

This Writ Petition has been filed under Article 32 of the Constitution of India seeking
a writ in the nature of Mandamus or any other appropriate writ/order/direction on the

1
Live
LaAavv..

Respondent No.1, i.e. the Union of India, to impose restrictions to prevent Civil Servants
from contesting elections to the Legislature, Central or State, on a political party ticket,
immediately after retirement or resignation from service, by imposing a “Cooling off
Period’.

Under Article 32 of the Constitution of India, appropriate proceedings may be filed
in this Court, as of right, for enforcement of any of the fundamental rights conferred by
Part Ill of the Constitution of India.

This Court has been conferred with the power under Article 32(2) of the
Constitution, to issue directions or orders or writs including writs in the nature of Habeas
Corpus, Mandamus, Prohibition, Quo Warranto, Certiorari, whichever may be
appropriate for the enforcement of any of the rights conferred by Part Ill of the
Constitution.

Unlike Article 32 of the Constitution of India which confers powers upon the
Supreme Court only to enforce fundamental rights guaranteed by Part Ill, Article 226 of
the Constitution confers wider powers on the High Courts to issue writs for enforcement
of the fundamental rights guaranteed in Part III as also for any other purpose.

A Writ Petition under Article 32 of the Constitution of India can only be filed in this
Court for enforcement of a fundamental right, unlike a Writ Petition in the High Court
under Article 226 of the Constitution of India which may lie for enforcement of a
fundamental right or any other purpose. The right under Article 32 of the Constitution to
approach this Court is itself a fundamental right.

In this case, there is no complaint of violation of any fundamental right of the
Petitioner or any group of persons represented by the Petitioner. Nobody has the
fundamental right to get a mandatory order of this Court directing the appropriate
Legislature to enact law or the Executive to frame rules imposing restrictions on the
eligibility of civil servant to contest elections. This Writ Petition cannot, therefore, be
entertained by this Court.

Even otherwise, a writ of Mandamus cannot be issued to direct the Respondents
to enact law and/or to frame rules even under the wider powers conferred under Article
226 of the Constitution. A Mandamus lies for enforcement of a fundamental right or a
statutory right, or the enforcement of a fundamental duty related to enforcement of a
fundamental right or a statutory right. In exceptional cases, a writ may even lie for
enforcement of an equitable right. The breach or threat to breach a fundamental,
statutory or may be enforceable equitable right, is the sine qua non for issuance of a writ
of Mandamus.

The right to compel performance of a public duty must be that of the Petitioner. Of
course, the rule of infringement of the fundamental right of the Petitioner does not mean
that the right must be that of the Petitioner alone and not of anybody else. A public interest
litigation may be entertained for enforcement of the fundamental right of any group of
people who may not be able to approach this Court.
Live
LaAavv..

The writ of Mandamus is only granted to compel performance of a public duty or
to enforce private rights when duties of a public nature, affect public rights or when private
rights are breached by or in collusion with public officers.

The legal duty that may be enjoined by Mandamus can be one imposed by the
Constitution, a statute, any law or by rules or orders having the force of law, which are
capable of being judicially enforced.

The writ of Mandamus is liable to be refused when there is no legal or constitutional
obligation of the authority concerned, which is capable of being enforced by Mandamus.

Whether under Article 32 or Article 226 of the Constitution of India, the Court can
give directions in order to prevent injustice. This Court and/or a High Court cannot direct
the Legislature to enact a particular legislation or the Executive to frame rules. This Court,
and/or the High Court, does not give any direction to the State to enforce an Act passed
by the Legislature. Nor does the Court enforce instructions in a Departmental Manual not
having statutory force, any non-statutory scheme or concession which does not give rise
to any legal right in favour of the Petitioner, far less, any recommendation made by an
authority such as the Election Commission. It is for the Union of India to take a decision
on the recommendation of the Election Commission, in accordance with law. It is not for
this Court to decide what should be the policy of the Government. Policy matters are
never interfered with, unless patently arbitrary, unreasonable or violative of Article 14 of
the Constitution.

It is reiterated at the cost of repetition that Mandamus will not be issued to
command Legislature to enact a law, which it is competent to enact. Reference may be
made to the judgments of this Court in Narinder Chand Hem Raj and Ors. vs. Lt.
Governor, Administrator, Union Territory, H.P. and Ors. reported in AIR 1971 SC
2399 and State of Jammu & Kashmir vs. A.R. Zakki & Others reported in AIR 1992
SC 1546.

As held by the Bombay High Court in Vidarbha (Rent Control) Bhadekaru Sangh
Akola and Anr. vs. State of Maharashtra and Anr. reported in AIR 1987 Bombay 10,
when the Legislature cannot be commanded to enact legislation, no Mandamus should
be issued to the Government to the same effect, however desirable the legislation may
be.

The Court cannot even issue a Mandamus to the Government for enforcement of
a Cabinet decision. It is only when an administrative order confers rights or creates
estoppel against the Government, that Mandamus can be issued to enforce the circular.
Similarly a Mandamus may be issued to cancel an administrative order, which violates
the rules of fairness.

The Petitioner had filed a similar Writ Petition in the High Court of Jharkhand at
Ranchi being W.P.(PIL) No. 4333/2015 which had been dismissed by an order dated
06.04.2016. The order of dismissal appears to have been accepted by the Petitioner.
The Petitioner did not question the order in this Court. This Writ Petition is barred by the
principles of res judicata and/or principles analogous thereto.
Live
LaAavv..

There can be no doubt that law may be enacted, laying down the norms and
qualifications for contesting specific elections. It is, however, for the appropriate
Legislature to frame the law.

There can be no doubt that civil servants should maintain the highest ethical
standards of integrity and honesty; political neutrality; fairness and impartiality in the
discharge of duties, courtesy, accountability and transparency.

Integrity, impartiality, neutrality, transparency and honesty are non-negotiable.
Ethical standards necessarily have to be enforced and stringent action taken against the
concerned officer whenever there is any breach of ethical standards as laid down in the
All India Services (Conduct) Rules, 1968.

Apart from the fact that no fundamental right of the Petitioner is in issue for which
a Writ Petition might be filed under Article 32 of the Constitution of India in this Court, we
do not find any merit in the contentions raised in the petition, even otherwise. It is not for
this Court to interfere in matters relating to framing of law, rules or policy. Whether there
should be any “Cooling off Period” for civil servants for them to contest elections or not
is best left to the concerned Legislature.

The allegations of bureaucrats deviating from strict norms of political neutrality with
a view to obtaining party tickets to contest elections, is vague, devoid of particulars and
unsupported by any materials which could justify intervention of this Court.

No particulars have been given of the number and/or percentage of erstwhile
bureaucrats, who have contested elections on the ticket of a political party, not to speak
of any act on their part, prior to their retirement, in deviation of the standards required of
bureaucrats.

It is not for this Court to decide whether or not there should be any rules/guidelines
for a bureaucrat to contest elections. It is for the appropriate authorities to take a decision
in this matter.

The Writ Petition is, accordingly, dismissed.
Pending applications, if any, shall stand disposed of.

© All Rights Reserved @LiveLaw Media Pvt. Ltd.
“Disclaimer: Always check with the original copy of judgment from the Court website. Access it here
